README.md, before:

# Kubernetes cluster using vagrant libvirtd as base


## Setup virtual machines

Start the vagrant machines:

```bash
vagrant up
```

Deploy the ansible playbook to install kubernetes binaries:

```bash
ansible-playbook -i inventory main.yml
```

## Deploy kubernetes

Configure kubernetes master node:

Connect to master node: example `vagrant ssh master`

```bash
sudo kubeadm init --pod-network-cidr=172.16.0.0/16 ## copy the output of this command to setup the nodes later

mkdir ~/.kube
sudo cp /etc/kubernetes/admin ~/.kube/config
sudo cp /etc/kubernetes/admin /vagrant
sudo chown 1000:1000 ~/.kube/config

kubectl create -f https://projectcalico.docs.tigera.io/manifests/tigera-operator.yaml
kubectl create -f /vagrant/k8s-manifests/colico/custom-resources.yaml
```

Configure kubernetes worker nodes:

Connect to all three nodes: example `vagrant ssh node1`

```bash
sudo kubeadm join 192.168.121.56:6443 --token y6i3sk.g1cfocfndxr882bb ## this command is an example, use the output of the master node 
```

## Configure your workstation

On your workstation

```bash
cp shared/admin ~/.kube/config
kubectl get nodes ## This should return all 4 pods (1 master and 3 nodes)
```

## Setup ingest controller: nginx

Source: https://github.com/geerlingguy/kubernetes-101/tree/master/episode-06

First we need a loadbalancer to route traffic

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/metallb/metallb/v0.11.0/manifests/namespace.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/metallb/metallb/v0.11.0/manifests/metallb.yaml
kubectl apply -f shared/k8s-manifests/metallb/config-map.yaml
```

Now we install the nginx ingress controller

```bash
helm repo add ingress-nginx https://kubernetes.github.io/ingress-nginx
helm install ingress-nginx ingress-nginx/ingress-nginx

kubectl get svc ingress-nginx-controller ## Get the external ip
```

## Setup Prometheus and Grafana

Source: https://github.com/geerlingguy/kubernetes-101/tree/master/episode-10

```bash
helm repo add prometheus-community https://prometheus-community.github.io/helm-charts
helm repo update

kubectl create namespace monitoring
helm install prometheus --namespace monitoring prometheus-community/kube-prometheus-stack

kubectl get deployments -n monitoring -w
```

After the deployment is finished, add a ingress controller configuration to Grafana

```bash
kubectl apply -f shared/k8s-manifests/grafana/grafana-ingress.yaml
```

Add a DNS A type record to your system pointing to the ingress controller IP address.

Example using /etc/hosts:
```config
10.0.0.30   grafana.k8s.test
```

## Setup NFS storage class

Source: https://github.com/geerlingguy/kubernetes-101/tree/master/episode-06 (outdated)

If you have a NFS storage, you can connect your cluster to it.

NFS storage class will allow you to use PVCs with ReadWriteMany mode.

```bash
helm repo add nfs-subdir-external-provisioner https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/nfs-subdir-external-provisioner/
helm install nfs-subdir-external-provisioner nfs-subdir-external-provisioner/nfs-subdir-external-provisioner \
    --set nfs.server=x.x.x.x \
    --set nfs.path=/exported/path
```


## References:

* [Kubernetes Setup Using Ansible and Vagrant](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2019/03/15/kubernetes-setup-using-ansible-and-vagrant/)
* [Jeff Geerling Kubernetes 101 Series](https://github.com/geerlingguy/kubernetes-101)
* [Calico Quickstart Guide](https://projectcalico.docs.tigera.io/getting-started/kubernetes/quickstart)
* [MetalLB Installation](https://metallb.universe.tf/installation/)
* [nfs-subdir-external-provisioner Github](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/nfs-subdir-external-provisioner)

Commit message:

feat: Improve Vagrant file with comments and parameters
Improve the `Vagrantfile` adding some variables where user
can set the memory for each node and the number of CPUs to be used.
Also added comments to facilitate the user to make those changes.

README.md, after:

# Kubernetes cluster using vagrant libvirtd as base


## Setup virtual machines

Before starting, make sure to set the values on the Vagrantfile to your environment.

Start the vagrant machines:

```bash
vagrant up
```

Deploy the ansible playbook to install kubernetes binaries:

```bash
ansible-playbook -i inventory main.yml
```

## Deploy kubernetes

Configure kubernetes master node:

Connect to master node: example `vagrant ssh master`

```bash
sudo kubeadm init --pod-network-cidr=172.16.0.0/16 ## copy the output of this command to setup the nodes later

mkdir ~/.kube
sudo cp /etc/kubernetes/admin ~/.kube/config
sudo cp /etc/kubernetes/admin /vagrant
sudo chown 1000:1000 ~/.kube/config

kubectl create -f https://projectcalico.docs.tigera.io/manifests/tigera-operator.yaml
kubectl create -f /vagrant/k8s-manifests/colico/custom-resources.yaml
```

Configure kubernetes worker nodes:

Connect to all three nodes: example `vagrant ssh node1`

```bash
sudo kubeadm join 192.168.121.56:6443 --token y6i3sk.g1cfocfndxr882bb ## this command is an example, use the output of the master node 
```

## Configure your workstation

On your workstation

```bash
cp shared/admin ~/.kube/config
kubectl get nodes ## This should return all 4 pods (1 master and 3 nodes)
```

## Setup ingest controller: nginx

Source: https://github.com/geerlingguy/kubernetes-101/tree/master/episode-06

First we need a loadbalancer to route traffic

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/metallb/metallb/v0.11.0/manifests/namespace.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/metallb/metallb/v0.11.0/manifests/metallb.yaml
kubectl apply -f shared/k8s-manifests/metallb/config-map.yaml
```

Now we install the nginx ingress controller

```bash
helm repo add ingress-nginx https://kubernetes.github.io/ingress-nginx
helm install ingress-nginx ingress-nginx/ingress-nginx

kubectl get svc ingress-nginx-controller ## Get the external ip
```

## Setup Prometheus and Grafana

Source: https://github.com/geerlingguy/kubernetes-101/tree/master/episode-10

```bash
helm repo add prometheus-community https://prometheus-community.github.io/helm-charts
helm repo update

kubectl create namespace monitoring
helm install prometheus --namespace monitoring prometheus-community/kube-prometheus-stack

kubectl get deployments -n monitoring -w
```

After the deployment is finished, add a ingress controller configuration to Grafana

```bash
kubectl apply -f shared/k8s-manifests/grafana/grafana-ingress.yaml
```

Add a DNS A type record to your system pointing to the ingress controller IP address.

Example using /etc/hosts:
```config
# /etc/hosts
10.0.0.30   grafana.k8s.test
```

## Setup NFS storage class

Source: https://github.com/geerlingguy/kubernetes-101/tree/master/episode-06 (outdated)

If you have a NFS storage, you can connect your cluster to it.

NFS storage class will allow you to use PVCs with ReadWriteMany mode.

```bash
helm repo add nfs-subdir-external-provisioner https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/nfs-subdir-external-provisioner/
helm install nfs-subdir-external-provisioner nfs-subdir-external-provisioner/nfs-subdir-external-provisioner \
    --set nfs.server=x.x.x.x \
    --set nfs.path=/exported/path
```


## References:

* [Kubernetes Setup Using Ansible and Vagrant](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2019/03/15/kubernetes-setup-using-ansible-and-vagrant/)
* [Jeff Geerling Kubernetes 101 Series](https://github.com/geerlingguy/kubernetes-101)
* [Calico Quickstart Guide](https://projectcalico.docs.tigera.io/getting-started/kubernetes/quickstart)
* [MetalLB Installation](https://metallb.universe.tf/installation/)
* [nfs-subdir-external-provisioner Github](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/nfs-subdir-external-provisioner)
